ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES
Rules & Regulations
(For Students enrolled from July 2022 onwards)
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplinesobliteratingtraditionalboundariesbetweenscience,humanities,social
sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT
Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effortamongitsgraduatesthroughcurricular,co-curricularandextra-curricularactivitieson
campus.
ug programs include btech courses
pg programs include mtech phd programs
The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted
Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate
Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensurehighstandard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to themiddleofJulyinthe
next year. The academic session is divided intothreeparts:tworegularsemestersandasummer
term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excludingthedaysoftheexaminations,thetotalnumberofdaysofinstructioninasemesterisat
least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, thecommencementofclasses,addinganddroppingof
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration:Studentsarerequiredtoregisterforprescribedcreditsaspertheprogramme,on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute,whoisawaitingthefinalresults
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration:Ifthestudentdoesnotregisterbythedateoflateregistrationasmentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal againstderegistrationmaybe
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the
Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.
e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the lastdateofadd-drop,astudentwillhavetheoptionof
withdrawing from a course.Thelastdateofcoursewithdrawalwillbetypicallywithinfourweeks
from the beginning of theSemesterasspecifiedintheacademiccalendar.Thewithdrawncourse
will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.
f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a
semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the
courses in that semester.
g. Summer course registration: Adepartmentmayoffersummercoursestoenablethestudents
to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during summer
provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered on
approval of the Dean/ Associate Dean.
4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1 Teaching
4.1.1 Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2 Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the numberofcontacthours
for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A student on successful completion of the course with a
passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturitylevelofstudentsforattendingacourse,acourseisassignedalevel.Acoursecanconsist
of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are
called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define allparameters
related to the course numbering scheme.
Table 4.1Course Code Description
Course Code M E L 1 X X 1
Descriptions Offering Course Level of Unique Identification Indicates
Department/IDRP Type Courses Number Fractal
Categories See Table 4.2 See See Table This code will be given 0: Regular
Table 4.3 4.4 centrally by the office of 1: Fractal 1
academics 2: Fractal 2
3: Fractal 3
Note:Examples of course codes
Course Title L-T-P Course Code
Regular Course Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 MEL1XX0
Robotics 3-0-2 MEL7XX0
Fractal 1: Robot Modelling 1-0-0 MEL7XX1
Fractal Course
Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming 1-0-0 MEL7XX2
Fractal 3: Robot Control 1-0-0 MEL7XX3
Table 4.2Departmental Code
S. N. Type Department/Platform/Office
Department
1 ME Mechanical Engineering
2 CS Computer Science and Engineering
3 EE Electrical Engineering
4 CI Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
5 CH Chemical Engineering
6 BB Bioscience and Bioengineering
7 MT Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
8 CY Chemistry
9 MA Mathematics
10 PH Physics
11 HS Humanities and Social Science
Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs)
12 DH Digital Humanities
13 SS Space Science and Technology
14 IO Internet of Things and Applications
15 RM Robotics and Mobility Systems
16 QC Quantum Information and Computation
17 SH Smart Healthcare
Schools
18 MS School of Management & Entrepreneurship
19 AI School of Artificial Intelligence & Data Science
20 SL School of Liberal Arts
Others
21 OA Office of Academics
22 OS Office of Students
Table 4.3Types for Courses
S. Course Category
N. Type
1 L Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and Practical
hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.)
2 P Practical / Practice based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis
of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3,
0-1-3, etc.)
3 D Project based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects)
4 N Non-graded core component
5 T Thesis
6 Q Seminar Courses
7 S Independent Study
8 R Product Realization
9 E Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded)
Table 4.4Level of Courses, category and credit requirements
S. Level Category Credit Requirements
N.
1 100 Courses for B.Tech. Programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=0)
2 200
3 300 B.Tech. (Cr>=38)
4 400 B.Tech. (Cr>=75)
5 500 PreparatoryCourses of M.Sc. and M.Tech. Programmes(NOT M.Tech. (Cr=0)
open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree) M. Sc. (Cr=0)
6 600 Courses for M.Sc. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=75)
M.Sc. (Cr>=0)
M.Tech. (Cr >= 0)
7 700 Courses for M.Tech. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=85 with
CGPA>=6*)
Advanced courses for M.Sc.
M.Sc. (Cr >=30)
M.Tech. (Cr>=0)
Ph.D. (Cr>=0)
8 800 Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. programmes, An 800 level M.Tech. (Cr>=14)
course should have 700 level course as a pre-requisite Ph.D. (Cr>=0)
4.1.3 Approval of Courses
The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.
4.1.4 List of Courses
The listofcoursestobeofferedinaProgramisfinalizedbeforethebeginningofthesemester,by
the Department hosting that Program.
4.1.5 Categories of Courses
Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:
a) Regular course:
A regular coursehas14hoursofclassroomengagementpercredit.Aregularcoursecanbeunder
elective or core/compulsory categories.
Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
register for the course. A700or800levelelectivecoursecanrunwithaminimumof5registered
students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per
the following section.
b) Self-study Course
Aself-studycoursewillbefromthelistofcoursesapprovedbytheSenate.Themainfeaturesofa
self-study course are as follows:
● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as aregularcourseorastudent
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsorycoursein
self-study mode provided he/shehasfailedinitearlierandthecourseisnotbeingoffered
as a regular course during that semester orastudentisnotoncampusduringthecourse
with prior approval of the competent authority.
● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriaterecommendationofa
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.
● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.
c) Independent Study Course
Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-discipline and havingasenseof
own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for IndependentStudycourseswiththe
recommendation of the Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study
course are as follows:
● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 creditsinself-studymodeatmostonceduringtheprogram.Such
an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.
● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program
committee.Thefinalsanctionofanindependent-studycoursetoastudentismadebythe
Dean (Academics).
● Normally, no formal lectures willbeheldforanindependentstudy coursebutlaboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The
Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for theaward
of letter grade at the end of the semester.
4.1.6 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistanceoftherequirednumberoftutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, andtransmittingthegradesasper
Subsection 5.2.
The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.
A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or thestudents
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction viaelectronicconferencinginvolving
both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved courseviaself-learninganddiscussion-orientedcontactsessions.Thismodecanbealso
adoptedforenablingastudenttotakeupstudyofanewcourse,notyetapprovedbythesenate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation componentsapplicabletocoursesbeingrun
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical
supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.
4.1.7 Teaching Assignments
The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocatedbythe
Head of the Department hosting the Program. When facultymembersofotherDepartmentsare
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.
4.1.8 Auditing of Courses
A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of the Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade
Card of the student.
4.1.9 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless thestudenttakesleaveofabsence
for valid reasons, the student hastoattendeverylecture,tutorial,orlabsession.Theattendance
records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s
attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not
meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a
course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower thanthecut-offforC
grade in a course.
4.2 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using theirinteractioninthe
classroom, and performances in examinations, thelaboratorywork(ifany),andterm-papersand
projects.
The performance of students in a course isevaluatedthroughexaminationsandonacontinuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests andexaminationsineach
subject in each semester.
● Minor 1, Minor2andMajorexaminationsaremandatorycomponentsoftheevaluationof
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.
5. GRADING SYSTEM
5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.
Each letter grade is associated with anumericalequivalentona10-pointscaleshowninTable5.1.
In addition, therearefourspeciallettergrades,namely,I,S,XandU,whichstandforIncomplete,
Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule.
Table 5.1Letter grade and its equivalent grade points
S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment
1 A* 10 Exceptional
2 A 10 Outstanding
3 A- 9 Excellent
4 B 8 Very Good
5 B- 7 Good
6 C 6 Average
7 C- 5 Below Average
8 D 4 Marginal
9 E 2 Poor
10 F 0 Fail
11 I Incomplete
12 S Satisfactory in Course
13 X Thesis Continuation
14 U Unsatisfactory
15 W Withdrawn
A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:
S.N. Grades Description
‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates exceptional
performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the number of registered
1 A*
students is more than 50.Itshouldnotexceed2%ofthetotalstrengthoftheparticular
theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not awarded for projects /seminars.
2 E ‘E’Gradewillbeawardedtoastudentwhohasscoredmarkslessthanthecutoffmarksfor
‘D’Gradeandhasmettheattendancecriterionoftheinstitute.Studentswhoobtainan‘E’
Gradewillbeeligibletoappearinanadditionalexamination.Iftheyperformsatisfactorily,
theybecomeeligibleforgettingthe‘E’gradeconvertedtoa‘D’Grade,otherwise,theywill
continue to have ‘E’ Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the
additional examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted
withinthefirstweekofthenextsemester.ThedateofadditionalexaminationofInstitute
core courses for undergraduate students will be centrally notified, while for all other
courses, the date would beannouncedbytherespectivecoursecoordinators.Astudent
canappearforamaximumofthreesuchadditionaltestsinagivensemester.Ifastudent
cannotappearforthetestduetoanyreason(s),he/shewillnotgetanyadditionalchance.
Ifastudentwith‘E’gradeinacoursedoesnotpassthecoursethroughtheadditionaltest,
orobtainsan‘F’gradeinthecourse,he/shehastorepeatthecourseifitisacorecourse.
Incasethecourseisanelective,thestudentmaytakethesamecourseagainoranyother
course.‘E’and‘F’GradesarenotcountedinthecalculationoftheCGPA;however,these
are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.
3 I An‘I’gradeistemporarilyawardedtoastudentonhis/herrequesttodenoteincomplete
performance in a course on approval of an instructor. An‘I’gradeisawardedincaseof
missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special
circumstances.Requestsfor‘I’gradeshouldbemadeattheearliestbutnotlaterthanthe
lastdayofmajortests.Allevaluationrequirementsforsuchstudentsinthecorresponding
course(s) should be completed on or before the last date of add and drop of courses
specified in the academic calendar. Upon completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’
grade is converted to a regular grade.
4 S Thisgradeisawardedtoastudentwithsatisfactoryperformanceinnon-gradedandAudit
courses or in a thesis after successful completion of the open seminar. The grades
obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.
5 X This grade is awarded to a student in a course for continuation.
6 U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or
non-graded courses.
7 W Thisgradeisawardedtoastudentwhohasoptedtowithdrawfromacourse.Withdrawal
from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics Calendar.
5.2 Procedure for declaration of results
The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as
per Academic Calendar.
1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester
2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors
3. Finalization of grades by Instructors
4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute
wide courses
5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department afterscrutinyofgradesbya
department moderation committee
6. Display of grades by Instructors
7. Gradecorrection,ifany,within48hoursofdisplayofgradesafterapprovaloftheheadof
the department
8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PGs)
9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)/Associate Dean(UG/PG)
10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate
11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptionalcases,
an appeal may be made to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal
justification.
5.3 Grade Point Averages
5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average
The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a
student in all courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the
respective semester. If the grade points associated with the lettergradesearnedbyastudentin
N courses registered during a semester are G, G , … G , and the corresponding creditsC,C ,…
1 2 N 1 2
C , then the SGPA is given by the following formula:
N
The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and
courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.
5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average
The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a
student in all the courses registered uptothelatestcompletedsemester.TheCGPAiscomputed
similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is calculated on the
basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and courses in which S/X
grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.
The SGPA and CGPA calculation is based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.
6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT
A Grade Card shall be issued to eachstudentattheendofeachsemester,andaTranscriptatthe
end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.
7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES
The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.
8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due togenuinereasonslikeillness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missedcomponents.Thestudent
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.
Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness.Astudentneedstoproducethenecessarydocumentsubjecttooneofthe
following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the
Medical OfficeroftheInstitutethathe/shewasadmittedintheHospitalduringtheperiod
of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in theHostelsandtakingmedicalconsultationwithoutsideDoctorsare
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but takingmedicalconsultationwithoutsideDoctorsare
required to obtain an endorsement on thecertificateoftreatmentbytheMedicalOfficer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside theCampuspermanently/temporarilymustproduceamedical
certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take themake-upexamination.Astudentwhomissesthismake-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
maypermitthestudenttoappearformake-upexaminationanydaybeforetheendofthe
first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance.
REGULATIONS FOR PG PROGRAMME
9. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate
programmes.
1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)
2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
4. Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)
10. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-DecemberforSemester2.Inaddition,the
department may process applications for admissionstoPhDprogramsonacontinuousbasisand
admit students as per the existing procedure.
10.1Categories of Admission
A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Part-time (online)
vi. Part-time (Project sponsored)
vii. Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time programs).
i) Full-time Regular
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.
ii) Full-time Sponsored
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The
candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must
have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.
iii) Part-time
Apart-timestudentisaworkingprofessionalwho,whileemployed,attendsregularclassesasper
schedule of the Institute. The student must produce anNOCfromtheemployerforpursuingthe
programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as
compared to a full-time regular student.
iv) External
A student working in anindustry/R&Destablishment/academicinstitutionwhichisequippedwith
the necessary research and library facilities. The employer mustrelievethestudenttostayinthe
campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.
v) Part-time (online)
A part-time (online) student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classesina
synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the Institute including limited contact
sessions. The student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. The
student will need to spend atleast12monthsinthecampusbeforesubmissionofthePh.Dthesis
distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. The
student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur
certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the
research work.
vi) Part-time (Project sponsored)
A part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the MoE stipulated rate
being supported through research projects running in theinstitute.Thestudentcanregisteronlyfor
a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. The student is expected to
receive the fellowship for a minimum of 36months.Thestudentwillbepayingfeesatthesamerate
as that of full time GATE Qualified candidates. The Department will process theapplicationsONLYif
such a position is available in the respective M. Tech. program.
vii) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in
1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of 6 years.
3. Part-time or full-time mode by attending coursesofferedinsynchronizedremotecontact
mode and limited direct interaction
10.2 Eligibility for Admission
a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
a. The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the
Senate from time to time.
b. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of
Governors.
10.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test forMaster(JAM)organizedby
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree inanyrelevantdiscipline(3or4yearprogram)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimumof60%marksforGEN/OBC (55%for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specifiedbytheuniversity/instituteoraminimumCGPAof6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.
10.2.2 Admission to M.Sc – M.Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test forMaster(JAM)organizedby
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree inanyrelevantdiscipline(3or4yearprogram)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimumof60%marksforGEN/OBC (55%for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specifiedbytheuniversity/instituteoraminimumCGPAof6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first class as specified by the university/institute.
10.2.3 Admission to M.Tech Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program)ora
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and
Veterinary Sciences or in related field
b) A minimum of 60% marksforGEN/OBC (55%forSC/ST)categoryinaggregateorasspecified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 forSC/ST)category
on the scale of10;withcorrespondingproportionalrequirementswhenthescalesareother
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8)orafirst
class as specified by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or havequalifiedanequivalentNationalExaminationorhavequalifiedinthewritten
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program)ora
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related fields.
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55%forSC/ST)categoryinaggregateorasspecified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 forSC/ST)category
on the scale of10;withcorrespondingproportionalrequirementswhenthescalesareother
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8)orafirst
class as specified by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must have aminimumoftwoyearsworkexperience(afterqualifyingdegree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after
the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.
d) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program)ora
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related field
b) A minimum of 60% marksforGEN/OBC (55%forSC/ST)categoryinaggregateorasspecified
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 forSC/ST)category
on the scale of10;withcorrespondingproportionalrequirementswhenthescalesareother
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first
class as specified by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or havequalifiedanequivalentNationalExaminationorhavequalifiedinthewritten
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
a) Candidates admittedinthiscategoryshallnotbearegisteredstudentinanyotheracademic
program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any
organization in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks oratleast6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent withatleast60%marksoratleast6.0/10CPIorCGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum fouryeardurationinengineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
10.2.7 Admission under any specialschemelikeQualityImprovementProgramme(QIP),
Defence Personnel
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided withtheapproval
of Chairman, Senate.
10.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals
INRA candidates musthavebeenresidingabroadcontinuouslyforatleastoneyearatthetimeof
applying for admission.
The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.
Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.
The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admissiontotheprogramme.Thedepartment'srecommendationwillbesenttotheChairperson,
Senate through the Chairperson, AC.
10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)
a) Candidates admittedinthiscategoryshallnotbearegisteredstudentinanyotheracademic
program in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks oratleast6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent withatleast60%marksoratleast6.0/10CPIorCGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum fouryeardurationinengineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
e) The applicant must have a minimumoftwoyearsworkexperience(afterqualifyingdegree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program.
f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part ofhis/heracademicrequirementsatIITJodhpur.Forthatpurpose,thenon-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate
satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the office of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximumof9creditsina
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course
Completion Certificate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certificate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.
Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.
10.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed.
11. PG REGISTRATION
11.1 Limits on Registration
Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:
● M.Sc.: A M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: A M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table
11.1.
Table 11.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits a M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular
semester/Summer Term :
M.Tech. student registered under different Indicative Maximum Minimum
categories Credits Credits
Regular Executive (Accelerated) 24 10
Semester Executive (Normal) 17 10
Executive (Slow-Paced) 12 3
Executive (Part Time) 12 3
Full-time (Regular/Sponsored) 17 10
External 20 10
Part-time 12 3
Summer Term Executive (Accelerated) 16 0
Executive (Normal) 9 0
Executive (Slow-Paced) 6 0
Full-time (Regular) 9 5
Full-time (Sponsored) 9 0
External 9 0
Part-time 6 0
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that a M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/direct Ph.D. student can register are
equivalent to that of a M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 11.2.
Table 11.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student can register for during the Regular
semester
Ph.D. student registered under different Indicative Indicative Minimum
categories Maximum Credits Maximum Credits Credits
(before qualifier) (after qualifier)
Full-time Regular 16 16 6
External 16 12 6
Part-Time 12 12 3
11.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to a M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by optingforRKAinsubsequentsemesters.Thecandidatemustindicatehis
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean (academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status.
11.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. (Regular) Programme to M.Tech. (Part-time)
Programme
A full-time regular M.Tech. student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time
M.Tech. programme after successful completion of third semester. A student requesting such a
conversion must:
i) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; and
ii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work
11.3 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree
Programme
A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till theendof
third semester. As a specialcase,astudentcanswitchtodualdegreeinthefourthsemesterwith
the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will thenberequiredtocomplete
his/her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester.
All conditionsoftheM.Tech.-Ph.D.dualdegreeprogramwillbeapplicabletoallsuchstudents.All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
11.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
A part-timeM.Tech.studenthavingCGPA8ormoreaftercompletionofatleast24creditsmaybe
allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted
towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.
11.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme
A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time
Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:
i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work.
11.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
● M.Sc.-8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive)-12 registeredsemesterswhich
may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of
the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as that of sponsored candidates.
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14
registered semesters which mayincludemaximum6semestersofRegistrationkeptAlive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as
that of sponsored candidates.
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.
11.6 Course Registration
Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 11.1 and
Table 4.4.
The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
her/his Masters or Bachelors program.
12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
12.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PGProgrammes
The total credits for acourseiscalculatedbytakingintoaccountthenumberoflectures,tutorial,
and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 12.1 and 12.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D.
programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the
expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.
Table 12.1LTP-structure and credit assignment forM.Sc.
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours# Total Credits (TC=TH/3)
Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact Total
Hours (BCH) Hours
(TH)
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1
1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5
1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.
Table 12.2LTP-structure and credit assignment forM.Tech./Ph.D.
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Total Credits
Hours# (TC=TH/4)
Contact Hours (CH) Beyond Contact Total
Hours (BCH) Hours
(TH)
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1
1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5
1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 3 4 1
1 hour of Thesis 0-0-1 1 3 4 1
(Ph.D.)
#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion,
etc.
12.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
1) Compulsory Course (MC)
2) Programme Compulsory (PC)
2) Programme Elective (ME)
3) Open Elective (MO/OE)
4) Specialization Core (SC)
5) Specialization Elective (SE)
6) Specialization Stream Electives (SSE)
7) Micro Specialization Core (MSC)
8) Project works (MP)
9) Non-graded (NG)
12.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students
Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 12.3.
Table 12.3Programs/ Credits to be earned for MScstudents
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
MC ME MO MP Total
M.Sc. (Chemistry) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Mathematics) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Physics) 38 18 06 15 77
M.Sc. (Digital Humanities) 37 18 06 15 76
Program Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SE/SC OE MP Total
M.Sc. (Computational Social Science) 37 18 6 15 76
12.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.
Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 12.4.
Table 12.4Minimum Credits to be earned For MTechstudents
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
MC ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing and Design) 19 15 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Materials Engineering) 16 18 06 16 4 60
M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 06 16 4 62
M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 06 16 4 61
M.Tech (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 06 16 4 61
M.Tech (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62
M.Tech (Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality) 19 15 6 16 4 60
M.Tech (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 6 16 4 60
M.Tech (Intelligent VLSI Systems) 20 16 6 16 4 62
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech (Infrastructure Engineering with Specialization in 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Environmental Engineering)
M.Tech (Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Major in 3 17 17 3 16 4 60
Energy)
Program Minimum Credits to be earned
MC MSC ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech (Robotics and Mobility Systems) 18 9 7 6 16 4 60
12.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree
Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree is cumulative sum of credit
requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 12.3
and 12.4.
12.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree
Course categories and academic requirements for MTech - PhD dual degree students are given
below in Table 12.5.
Table 12.5Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degreeMTech and PhD students
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
MC ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Communication and Signal Processing) 17 17 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Materials Engineering) 16 18 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Computer Science and Engineering) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 03 20 4 62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Intelligent Communication Systems) 20 16 03 20 4 63
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Advanced Manufacturing) 19 15 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Mechanical Design) 19 15 03 20 4 61
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Data and Computational Sciences) 20 15 03 20 4 62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Chemical Engineering) 17 17 03 20 4 61
Programs Minimum Credits to be earned
PC SSE ME MO MP NG Total
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Infrastructure Engineering 3 17 17 03 20 4 64
with Specialization in Environmental Engineering)
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Civil and Infrastructure 3 17 17 03 20 4 64
Engineering with Major in Energy)
The DRC/IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses.
12.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students
The minimum credits to be earned through courses, is listed in Table 12.6.
Table 12.6Credit Requirements for PhD students
S.No. Ph.D. in With Minimum Credits Minimum Credits
through Course through Thesis
Work Work
1. Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. 12 48
discipline (Engineering) in an Engineering
discipline
M.Sc. degree in a Science 24 48
discipline
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. 24 48
(Engineering) in an Engineering
discipline
2. Science, Humanities M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in 12 48
or Social Science a Science, Humanities or Social
discipline Science discipline
The indicative maximum credits,astudentregistersinasemester,arenotional. Inadditiontothe
above minimum credit requirements through coursework, Ph. D. students are further required to
complete four compulsory non-graded (NG) courses before the open seminar. A student already
completed a NG course as part of his/her program need not register for the same course again.
The coursework requirements for IDRP Ph.D. students will be in line with Table 12.6.
While securing the minimum overall CGPA requirement in12(Ph.D.indepartmentaldomains)/24
(Ph.D. in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline/direct Ph.D.) earned credits, a
course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of 4 credits for Ph.D. students in
departmental domains and 8 credits for Ph.D. students in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a
Science discipline or for students enrolled in direct Ph.D. programme. The student can repeat
course(s) within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is
poor (secured grade is B- or lower). No replacement of course(s) in which the student has
secured pass grade and above is allowed. If the student opts to repeat a course,thenthegrade
secured in the next attempt will prevail.
12.8 Academic Performance Requirements
12.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given
below in Table 12.7.
Table 12.7Minimum CGPA requirements
Sr. Program Continuation in Programme For graduation
No. (SGPA)
1 M.Sc. (only graduation Refer 12.8.2 5.0
requirement)
2 M.Tech. 5.0 5.0
3 Dual Degree (M.Sc. and 5.0 5.0
M.Tech.)
4 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.0
Ph.D.)
5 Ph.D. 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.5 at completion of course
work
12.8.2 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for Ph.D. students
A PhD student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average
(DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the bestperformanceofthestudentinminimum
number of credits.
12.8.3 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.
M.Sc.-The student must earn at least 20 credits atthe end of second semester for continuation in
the program.
12.8.4 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below
Table 12.8
Table 12.8Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuationof Assistantship/Fellowship
Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/
Fellowship
1 M.Tech. 6.0
2 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.) 6.5
3 Ph.D. 6.5
13. LEAVE RULES
Application for leaveofabsenceshouldbeaddressedtotheConvenerDRC,andsubmittedwitha
medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of
the DRC.
13.1 Leave
A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + midsemester
break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or
mid-semester break.
A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch
The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period.
13.2 Other Leaves
Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MoE. It will not be
counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme.
Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MoE.
13.3 Semester Withdrawal
May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
In all such cases, thefellowshipwillbestoppedwithimmediateeffectanditwillbecontinuedfor
only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics
regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it
can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on medical
ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the
student.
13.4 Academic Leave
Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as
1. Field work
2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium
5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as
indicated in his research proposal
7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with sister institution in India or
abroad
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is
granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship
during academic leave.
● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as
certified by SRC and approved by DRC.
14. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted
under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:
14.1 M.Sc. Program
Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.
14.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program
A student having completed minimum credit requirements of a M.Sc. program at the end of
second year with
a. CGPA>=8
OR
b. have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.
14.3 M.Tech. Program
A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
14.4 Executive M Tech Program
Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the
Institute.
14.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be atparwith
regular Ph.D. students.
14.6 Ph.D. Program
A regular Ph.D. student admittedtotheInstitutewillbeeligibleforfinancialassistanceasperthe
norms of IIT Jodhpur.
a. A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with
GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms.
b. The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech. or equivalent
post-Bachelor’s degree
c. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met the qualifier requirement. Enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completionofboththeconditions.Noarrearswillbeprovidedduetodelayincompleting
the qualifier requirement. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above
requirements.
The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student willcontinuetillthesisDefenseorendof
the semester in which he/she has submitted thesis, whicheverisearlier.Theaboveispermissible
subject to assistantship/fellowship available in the semester under question as per
MHRD/CSIR/DST/UGC rule.
15. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF
M.TECH./M.SC. PROJECT
● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to regular
supervisor(s).
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field ofresearch
with at least one-memberexternaltothedepartment(maybeoutsidetheInstitutealso).
DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. Same committee may
examine more than one thesis. The external member can be on VC. DRC willensurethat
the Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2nd semester. He must obtainasatisfactorygradetocontinueM.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.
16. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D. DUAL DEGREE
PROGRAM
16.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
16.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.
There should at least be a faculty member available orlikelytojoinintheareasofinterestofthe
candidate at the time of selection.
16.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be
assigned at the time of selection.
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester.
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research and Postgraduate Committee)/Coordinator,
IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Program Committee) would advise until the student is
assigned to regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRCandtheDean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance.Fromthefinancial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.
16.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the
DRC/IRC shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the
student to take care of the administrative requirements.
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and
will havetooptforanadditionalsupervisorprovidedthestudenthasclearedthequalifier
before supervisor’s retirement/resignation.
16.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinatorsofM.Tech,M.Tech.-Ph.D.dualdegreeandPh.D.programsof
the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/AssociateProfessorproposedby
the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by a Professor/Associate Professor nominatedbytheHeadof
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The
DRC has to be approved by the Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the
convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.
16.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor asthe
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of thecommittee.Thetenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).
16.2 Change of Research Supervisor
Change of supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of
(i) the student (ii) the present supervisor(s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s).
If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under supervision of the
DRC/IRC.
16.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
16.3.1 Composition of SRC
● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the
department (may be outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by the Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shallbecommunicatedthrough
the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the
thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the
completion of the program.
16.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
Academic progress ofallregisteredPh.D.studentswillbereviewedonceinayearbytheSRCand
peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) AnnualProgressReportand(ii)APoster
Presentation open to all. SRC will award Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and
(ii). Two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.
For implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progressevaluationofresearchscholars.Followinggroupingsofstudentsand
scheduling guidelines are suggested
1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of September of every year
2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of February of every year
The first APM will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. Those
students who have got 6 months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them APM
can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier
requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be
reported by supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.
Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)
16.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements fora
Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.
1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 12.8.1
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research
4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of thefifthsemesterofhis/herregistrationinthePh.D.programandinany
case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D.
program. Part-time and direct Ph.D. candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the seventh semester. M.Tech.-Ph.D. candidates will need to complete
qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than
the beginningofthesixthsemesteraftertheirregistrationintheprogram.ForM.Tech.-Ph.D.dual
degree students, the 16 credits associated with the M.Tech. project II are tobeconvertedtothe
RP.
16.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the
student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination
Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting the comprehensiveexamination.
Each paper will havebroadcoverageofoneessentialsub-areaofthedepartment.Course
content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and Senate. The
syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses
offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of theknowledgein
that area.
● The SRC will specify a setofthreepapersascomprehensiverequirementsforaparticular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
withintwo weeksof SRC formation.
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
● If theperformanceofthePh.D.studentinacomprehensiveexaminationpaperinthefirst
attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear during
the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. For valid
medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not abletoregisterforthecomprehensive
examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester
with prior approval to the Dean/Associate Dean (PG- Programs).
● For clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all
papers.
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:
● Ph.D.: within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and Part-Time Ph.D.: within 5 semesters
16.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)
Every Ph.D. student is requiredtogiveageneralseminarintheDepartmentcoveringtheStateof
Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area.
The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in
SOTAawardedbySRCforbecomingeligibletopresenthisresearchproposal.TheStateoftheArt
seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. For M.Tech.-Ph.D.
students, the presentation in M.Tech. Project I will be considered as SOTA.
16.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The Research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a lettergradebasedontheperformanceofthe
candidate.
16.6 Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed thequalifierrequirementsforthedegree.Onlysuchstudents
who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.
The time-lines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination are summarized in Table 12.9 .
Table 12.9 Timelines for comprehensive examination, state of the art seminar and candidacy
examination
Sr. No. Ph.D. (Regular) Ph.D. (Part-time) Ph.D. (Direct) M.Tech.-Ph.D.
Comprehensive 3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters
Examination
State-of-the-Art 3 Semesters 5 Semesters 5 Semesters 3 Semesters
Seminar
Candidacy 4 Semesters 6 Semesters 6 Semesters 4 Semesters
Examination
16.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier
requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. students and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if
SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration.
16.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registrationofastudentwhoseprogressisnotfoundtobesatisfactorybytheSRCor
who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis beforetheendofthe
maximum permissible period specified in Section 11.5 will be liable for cancellation.
16.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door
assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied about the quality and
quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis
report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar
date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in
4.6.1, the comprehensiveexamination,theSOTA,theresearchworkandthesynopsis,the
student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the
required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.
● The student should have at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals and/or A+
conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the
Department of Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be
specified separately.
16.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10examinersconsistingofatleastfourFacultyMembers
from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertiseintheareainwhichthe
student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed
● The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of
which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, the SRC and
Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Indian examiners shall attend in person the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesiswithinaperiodoftwomonths
from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of thePh.D.degree,nodegreeshallbe
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelledinthe
Ph.D. program.
● If an examiner suggests revision of theThesis,thestudentshallresubmittheThesisafter
the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the
Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defendthe
Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committeeconsistingofChairmanSRC,Supervisor(s),theExaminerfromwithinIndia
and other Faculty Members, who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to the Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.
17. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the
requirements laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4 below.
17.1 Minimum Residential Requirement
Table 17.1Minimum residential requirement
S.No. Program Qualifications at the time of joining the Minimum Duration (in
Program semesters) of Residence
1. M.Sc. All qualifying degrees 4
2. M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual All qualifying degrees 7
Degree
3. M.Tech. Programs
Full-time Regular All qualifying degrees 3
/Sponsored
Part-time/ Part-time All qualifying degrees 0
Executive
Executive All qualifying degrees 1
4. Ph. D. Programs
Engineering discipline M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an 2
Engineering discipline
M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline 5
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an 5
Engineering discipline
Science, Humanities or M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a 2
Social Science discipline Science, Humanities or Social Science
discipline
Part-time All qualifying degrees 0
External All qualifying degrees 1
17.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 12.3 for M. Sc., Section 12.4 for M. Tech., Section 12.5 for M.
Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 12.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 12.7 for Ph.D.,
while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 12.8.
17.3 No Dues Clearance
The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if
there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.
17.5 Award of Degrees
17.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completesallthegraduationrequirementsspecifiedinClauses17.1to17.4,canbe
provided a provisional certificate by theofficeofDean(Academics)ontheapprovalofChairman,
Senate.
17.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the awardoftheappropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval.
17.6 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation
requirements is detected at a laterstage,theSenatemayrecommendtotheBoardofGovernors
for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.
18. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur.